BARACK OBAMA: The U.S has the
most durable economy in the
world.
HILLARY CLINTON: I don't think
President Obama gets the credit
he deserves for digging us
out of the ditch that the
republicans dropped us into.
DONALD TRUMP: We have other
countries basically sucking away
our money, sucking away our
jobs.
BERNIE SANDERS: Anyone in this
country who works 40 hours a
week should not live in poverty.
IF you want a job in Elkhart
County, you can find a job.
Its a good place to live for
people who need a job who are
not college-educated.
People tend to live paycheck to
paycheck. The foodstamps that we
get are not enough
to feed a family.
Most of our society thinks they
deserve something. The
Government tends to give too
much to people
who don't want to work. I think
we're more divided than we've
ever been and the people
running for office now--who in
the world are you going to vote
for?
ANNOUNCER: This is a PBS
NEWSHOUR special -- Questions
for President Obama.
Now, from the Lerner Theatre in
Elkhart, Indiana, PBS NewsHour
co-anchor, Gwen Ifill.
GWEN IFILL: Good evening.
And welcome to Elkhart, Indiana,
as we sit down with President
Obama and the residents
of this community to discuss
their concerns, look back on his
time in office and assess
the feverish campaign
to succeed him.
This marks the president's fifth
visit to the once and again RV
capital of the world
-- a small city where the
unemployment rate hit 19.6
percent his first year in office
and now has dropped
to about 4 percent.
But this White House isn't
getting any credit for that
turnaround. Residents here voted
for Ted Cruz in this year's
primaries and Mitt Romney by two
to one in 2012. Even when
President Obama won Indiana in
2008, just as the economy was
crashing, Elkhart went
with John McCain.
So what gives?
We've asked some of the people
who live here to join us on the
stage of the beautiful Lerner
Theatre here downtown for
an intimate conversation.
But first, the president of the
United States, Barack Obama.
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: Hi, Gwen.
(APPLAUSE)
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: How are you?
GWEN IFILL: Hi, Mr. President.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
It's good to see you.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Hello.
(APPLAUSE)
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: Thank you.
(APPLAUSE)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
Thank you, guys.
GWEN IFILL: Our residents have
been waiting faithfully,
patiently and eagerly to see you
today.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
I'm eager to see them.
And this is a beautiful theatre.
GWEN IFILL: It is beautiful.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Which
got converted. Congratulations
on a wonderful venue.
IFILL: Some of them voted for
you, some of them didn't. We'll
be talking about that...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
that's what we d expect.
GWEN IFILL: -- in a moment.
But I first want to ask by
talking to you a little bit
about this campaign.
What do you think it means when
you hear the words let's make
America great again ?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: I think
America is pretty great. And,
you know, it's interesting,
I do a lot of commencement
speeches this time of year. In
fact, tomorrow, I'm going to be
going to the Air Force Academy
to deliver a commencement for
the second time there.
And I always remind young people
that despite all the challenges
that we face right now,
if you had the choice to be born
in -- in any one period of time
in -- in our history,
and you didn't know ahead of
time whether you were going to
be rich or poor, black or
white, male or female, you know,
you just had to guess on what
moment do you have a
best chance of succeeding,
it actually would be now.
That America is the strongest
country on Earth. Its economy is
the most durable on Earth.
You know, we are a -- a country
that has incredible diversity,
people are striving, working
hard,
creating businesses. We've got
the best universities in the
world, the best scientists.
You know, so we've got -- we've
got some challenges and we've
just come through a very rough
stretch
as a consequence of the
financial crisis, but overall,
not only are we recovered from
the crisis that we had, but
we're well positioned to do
extraordinarily well going
forward as
long as we make some
good decisions.
GWEN IFILL: And yet, many
people, including probably some
folks in this room...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: -- think the
deficits have gone up and the
jobless rate has gone up. And,
in fact, that their lives
have not improved.
How -- in fact, we have your
nominee for the -- the
presumptive nominee for the
Republican
Party saying, Donald Trump,
saying this -- America is a
third world nation.
How do you persuade -- or I
suppose, how does your likely
Democratic successor, possible,
persuade anybody
that's not true?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
it's important you said my
successor, because Michelle
would
be very upset if she thought
I was running again.
Look, you just look at the
evidence here in Elkhart. As you
mentioned in the introduction,
when I took office, this was the
first city I came to. And
unemployment about a month
after I took office, a month and
a half after I took office, was
almost 20 percent. One
out of 10 people were behind on
their mortgage or in
foreclosure.
Today, the unemployment rate is
around 4 percent. It's only
about one in 30 people who are
behind
on their mortgage. The RV
industry, which is, uh, central
to Elkhart, is on track to
break records in terms of sales.
And so that doesn't mean that
folks aren't struggling
in some circumstances. And one
of the things that I've
emphasized is that there are
some
long-term trends in the economy
that we have to tackle in terms
of wages not going up as
fast as they used to, some big
costs, like college costs or
health care costs that are
still a challenge, people still
worrying about retirement.
And so we're going to have to
make sure that we make some good
decisions going forward.
But the notion that somehow
America is in decline is just
not borne out by the facts.
That...
GWEN IFILL: But it resonates.
It resonates among a lot of...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well...
GWEN IFILL: -- aggrieved people
who are voting in big numbers
for Donald Trump.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
look, -- I think that what it is
also -- always been true in
American politics is that when
we've gone through a tough time
-- and we went through
the worst financial crisis of
our lifetimes. I'm looking
around and I -- I think it's
safe
to say that it's been the worst
in -- in the lifetimes or
memories of most people here.
Then you feel nervous. People
lost homes. People lost savings.
People were worried about
whether or not they
could make ends meet.
And so we're -- even though
we've recovered, people feel
like the ground under their feet
isn't quite as solid. And in
those circumstances, a lot of
times it's easy for somebody to
come
up and say you know what, if we
deport all the immigrants and
build a wall or if we cut
off trade with China, or if we
do X or Y or Z, that there's
some simple answer and suddenly
everything is going to
feel secure. And...
GWEN IFILL: Why don't -- why
don't you mention Donald Trump
by name?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: You
know, he seems to do a good job
mentioning his own name,
so...
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: --
I figure -- you know...
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: -- I'll
let him do his advertising for
him.
GWEN IFILL: Do you consider at
all that any of the support for
him is backlash against
you personally?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
here's one thing I would say --
and I just spoke about this
at the local high school. I
think Trump is a more colorful
character than some of the
other Republican elected
officials, but a lot of the
story that he's telling is
entirely
consistent with what folks have
been saying about me or the
general story they've been
telling about the economy for
the last seven and a half, the
last 10, the last 20, the
last 30 years. And you can --
you can actually describe the
story fairly concisely, right?
The -- the basic story they tell
is that the problems that the
middle class working families
are experiencing has to do with
a big bloated government that
taxes the heck out of people
and then gives that money to
undeserving folks, welfare
cheats or, you know, the 47
percent
who are takers or, you know,
whatever phrase they use, that
businesses are being strangled
by over-regulation, that, you
know, Obamacare has killed jobs.
And the fact of the matter is
when you look at it, the
government, as a proportion of
our overall economy, is actually
smaller now under my presidency
than it was under Ronald
Reagan...
GWEN IFILL: Let me
read you something...
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: : -- I have...
GWEN IFILL: -- that Bill
Clinton said, though.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: But --
but let me -- let me finish,
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: We have
fewer federal employees today.
GWEN IFILL: Um-hmm.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: The --
the health care costs since I
signed Obamacare have actually
gone up slower than they were
before I signed it. Twenty
million more people have health
insurance.
So the arguments they're making
just are not borne out by the
facts. But what is true is
that if people are feeling
secure -- feeling insecure and
they're offered a simple reason
for how they can feel more
secure, people are going to be
tempted by it, particularly
if they're hearing that same
story over and over again.
GWEN IFILL: Perception. So Bill
Clinton said, "Millions and
millions and millions of people
look at that pretty picture of
America you painted," which you
just described, "and they
cannot find themselves in
it to save their lives."
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: The
pretty picture that...
GWEN IFILL: The pretty picture
of all the things that have gone
well. Why is there a
disconnect between -- that
he's describing here?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
look, here's what has changed in
the economy over the last
20 to 30 years. Right after
World War II, America was
ascendant. It was dominant
around
the world because Europe was
blown up. Japan was digging
itself out of the rubble. China
was still a backwater. Eastern
Europe was behind the Iron
Curtain.
There wasn't much competition.
We were the only folks who were
seriously making cars
and trucks and appliances
and you name it.
We had strong unionization,
which meant that workers had
leverage so that they could get
a good share of a growing pie.
And people saw each year and
each generation their standards
of living going up
pretty rapidly.
And what started happening is
you started seeing foreign
competition. Unions started
getting busted, so workers had
less leverage, which meant their
wages didn't go up quite
as fast. You started seeing the
end of defined benefit pension
plans. In terms of health
care programs, if you had health
care on your job, suddenly you
were paying a lot of deductibles
and premiums.
College costs started going up
because the public university
system, which used to be
generously funded by state
governments so that tuition was
low, suddenly state governments
were spending more money on
prisons than they were on
universities, which meant
tuition
went up.
You add all those things
together, and people then start
feeling more stressed.
Now, the answer to that is how
do we get wages up; how do we
make sure that you can save
for retirement; how can you make
sure that your kid can afford to
get a higher education
to compete for the jobs of the
future. And the question then is
what is actually going
to get that done?
To me, if we raise the minimum
wage; if we make it easier not
harder for people to unionize;
if we negotiate trade deals that
raise labor standards and
environmental standards in other
countries, instead of letting
them sell here and we can't sell
there; if we make sure that
we're rebuilding our roads and
our bridges and our
infrastructure to put a bunch of
folks
in hard-hats back to work; if we
make Social Security stronger
rather than cutting it.
If we do those things, then we
are going to see wages go up,
labor markets tighten, and
we will relieve a lot of the
stress that people feel. But if
you look at the arguments that
are being made by the
Republicans and the actions that
have been taken by those members
of Congress, it's hard to see
how cutting taxes for the
wealthiest Americans,
deregulating
Wall Street again, is somehow
going to benefit middle class
families.
GWEN IFILL: But let's turn to
the audience and see what they
think. We're going to open
this conversation up. I have a
lot more questions, but they do,
too. And we're going to be right
back in just a moment with that.
(BREAK) GWEN IFILL: So Mr.
President, we are back
with a few questions for you
from our invited audience here.
They are anxious to get started
and so am I.
You're a small businessman
here in Elkhart.
BILL KERCHER, Farmer: Yes, I am.
GWEN IFILL: What's your name?
BILL KERCHER: Bill Kercher.
GWEN IFILL: What's your
question for the president?
BILL KERCHER: Mr. President, I
am a fifth-generation fruit and
vegetable grower here in Elkhart
County. And over the last six
years, we've seen a dramatic
increase in the number of
regulations that touch all
aspects of our business, from
the Food Safety Modernization
Act to Obamacare
and many others.
Now, large farms are able to
comply with these regulations
more easily, and small family
farms we've seen actually
exiting the industry. At what
point are we overregulated, if
not
now? And how can we encourage
younger growers to either stay
or enter an industry when the
barriers to entry are
higher than ever?
Thank you.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
it's a great question. And first
of all, my administration's
policy has been to encourage
family farming, rather than big
agribusiness, because not
only is that sort of a model of
farming that built this country,
but as Michelle will tell
you, it actually produces food
that's better for you, as she
reminds me constantly.
So, you know, we want you to
succeed. Now, if you look at the
trend lines in terms of
small family farms, the problem
generally has been actually
farms getting bought up
by larger agricultural
operations. It's been you guys
not always getting good prices
for
the products that
you put together.
I don't doubt that some elements
of the regulations I put in
place have probably put a burden
on you. So let's take health
care for example. It may be that
previously you weren't -- you
didn't think you were able to
provide health insurance for
your employees. The problem
is that if they're not getting
health insurance through you,
then that means that they're
relying on the emergency room.
And they're relying on, you
know, taxpayers like everybody
else to cover those costs if
they get in an accident or if
they get sick.
And so it has always been our
view that if we can put
something together where people
can buy health insurance through
a pool, it's subsidized if
they're not making enough money
to pay for their own health
insurance, that that overall is
going to be a more efficient
way to do it and in fact health
care inflation, the rate at
which healthcare costs have gone
up, for small businesses as well
as large businesses, has been
significantly slower
since I passed the law
than it was beforehand.
Now, what I would say is that
there are a bunch of regulations
that have been put in
place in the past that may have
been well intentioned, but
didn't work, sometimes they're
outdated. And so what I've told
my administration to do is to go
back and look at all the
regulations
that are there. If there's not a
good reason for them or if
they're outdated or if we can
redesign them to put less of a
burden on businesses, we should
do so.
I'm not interested in regulating
just for the sake of regulating,
but there are some
things like making sure we've
got clean air and clean water,
making sure that folks have
health insurance, making sure
that worker safety is a
priority. That, I do think, is
part of our overall obligation
as a -- as not a third world
country, but as a advanced
nation to make sure that
we're doing the right thing.
And I would hope that as a
consequence of the overall
economy doing better, you've
also
been doing better as well. And
you know, anybody who's running
a business would rather not
have any regulations, just as a
general rule, and certainly, you
don't want a situation
where you feel like you're being
regulated and your competitor is
not. But what we try
to do is to be very fair in
terms of looking at what
regulations make a difference.
If you're a really small
business of like 25 people or
less, typically you are exempted
from those -- a lot of the
federal regulations. If you get
to a certain size, then it's
part
of the cost of doing business,
but what it also does is it
makes sure that we, as a
society,
are looking out for workers,
we're protecting our families
and people are getting decent
wages and they've got health
care so they're not going to the
emergency room when they
get sick.
GWEN IFILL: Thank you, Mr.
President. Thank you, Mr.
Kercher.
As you may have been -- may have
noticed, while in this election,
Donald Trump came
to Indiana and talked a lot
about what happened with the
Carrier Corporation and shipping
the jobs out of state. Here's
someone who worked for Carrier
and he has a question for
you.
ERIC COTTONHAM, Carrier
Employee: How are you doing, Mr.
President?
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: How are you?
ERIC COTTONHAM: My name is Eric
Cottonham and I'm representing
the Steelworkers Union,
Local 1999. And I'm trying to
find out, what do we have left
far us -- all of our jobs
are leaving Indianapolis. I see
here you're doing a lot of
things, but in Indianapolis,
there's nothing there for us. I
mean, what's next? I mean, what
can we look forward to
in the future as far as jobs,
employment, whatever? Because
all of our jobs has left
or in the process
of leaving, sir.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well, in
fact, we've seen more
manufacturing jobs created since
I've been president than anytime
since the 1990s. That's a fact.
And you know, if you
look at just the auto industry
as an example, they've had
record sales and they've hired
back more people over the last
five years than they have for a
very long, long time.
We actually make more stuff,
have a bigger manufacturing base
today than we've had in
most of our history. The
problems have been -- part of
the problems have had to do with
jobs going overseas and this is
one of the reasons why I've been
trying to negotiate
trade deals to raise wages and
environmental standards in other
countries, so that they're
not undercutting us.
But frankly, part of it has had
to do with automation. You go
into an auto factory today
that used to have 10,000 people
and now they've got 1,000 people
making the same number of
cars or more. And -- so what
that means is even though we're
making the same amount of
stuff in our manufacturing
sector, we're employing fewer
people.
Now, the good news is that there
are entire new industries that
are starting to pop up
and you're actually seeing some
manufacturers coming back to the
United States because they're
starting to realize, "You know
what? Energy prices are lower
here, workers are better
here, this is our biggest
market. And so even though we
off-shored and went someplace
else
before, now it turns out we're
better off going ahead and
manufacturing here."
But for those folks who have
lost their job right now because
a plant went down the Mexico,
that isn't going to make you
feel better. And so what we have
to do is to make sure
that folks are trained for the
jobs that are coming in now
because some of those jobs of
the past are just not going to
come back, and when somebody
says, like the person you
just mentioned who I'm not going
to advertise for, that he's
going to bring all these jobs
back, well how exactly are you
going to do that? What are you
going to do?
There's -- there's no answer to
it. He just says, "Well, I'm
going to negotiate a better
deal." Well, how -- what -- how
exactly are you going to
negotiate that? What magic wand
do you have? And usually, the
answer is he doesn't have an
answer.
So what I've tried to do, what
my administration's tried to do
is let's grow those
manufacturing
sectors, like clean energy, like
some of these new technologies
that are coming up, let's
focus on those. We've set up,
for example, manufacturing hubs
where we work with universities,
local businesses, local
governments, to create research
labs that can take something
like
3-D printing or, you know,
nanotechnology -- all kinds of
stuff that I can't really
explain because, you know,
scientists and really smart
people know all about it -- and
said let's invest in this so
that when the new jobs come,
they're coming here.
But I've got to tell you that
the days when you just being
able to -- you just being
willing
to work hard and you can now
walk into a plant and suddenly
there's going to be a job for
you for 30 years or 40 years,
that's just not going to be
there for our kids because
more and more, that stuff's
going to be automated. And if
you go into a factory, that
kid's going
to need to know computers or is
going to need to know some
science and some math because
they're not even going to be
picking anything up, they're
just going to be working on a
keyboard.
And that's why we put so much
emphasis on job training,
community colleges, that's why
I've proposed making the first
two years of community college
free so that we know that
every young person, they're
going to be able to -- if
they're not going for a full
four-year
degree, at least they're going
to be getting the technical
training they need for those
jobs in the future.
But you cannot look backwards,
and that doesn't make folks feel
good sometimes, especially
if it's a town that was reliant
on a couple of big
manufacturers. But they're going
to
have to retrain for the jobs of
the future, not the jobs of the
past.
GWEN IFILL: Now, you've
mentioned education, you've
touched on education and we have
a
question here about
that. What's your name?
VANESSA CORREDERA, English
Professor: Vanessa Corredera.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
VANESSA CORREDERA:
Hi, Mr. President.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
How are you, Vanessa?
VANESSA CORREDERA: Fine, thank
you. You've addressed the
crushing student debt,
especially
for higher education and you've
cited initiatives with community
colleges, the STEM disciplines
and technology as potential
responses. Many of my friends
and especially my students are
still struggling
with this issue.
So my question for you is how do
you continue to address this
issue your final months in
office? And how can you do so in
a way that perhaps includes the
humanities and liberal
arts education as whole when
frankly, those are often very
much under attack?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
What do you teach?
VANESSA CORREDERA: I teach
English at Andrews University
over in Michigan.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: I
thought you were a student.
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: I'm
getting old. I'm telling you.
All the teachers look like
students
now.
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
first of all, let me just say
that I have been emphasizing
STEM education -- that's
science, technology, engineering
and math -- not because I think
the humanities are unimportant,
but because we generally have
not been producing as many
engineers and as many scientists
and people with those kinds of
technological skills as
compared to China, for example.
And we send a lot of people into
banking and folks like me, who
become lawyers. But the
truth of the matter is that we
have to make sure that we
continue to have a strong base
in the sciences and engineering
if we're going to remain the
most innovative economy in the
world.
But as somebody who's studied
humanities himself, you know, I
think it's extremely important,
as well.
The broader issue of financing
education, as I mentioned, the
reason that college is
so much more expensive for this
generation as it was for my
generation and even better
for the previous generation
really had to do with government
spending. It used to be
that most state universities
were heavily subsidized by the
state, so they kept tuition
really, really low.
What happened, around the '80s
and '90s was state legislators
started saying we've got
to build more prisons. In
fairness to them, they also
started feeling more pressure
because
of Medicaid spending, because
health care costs were going up.
And so they started cutting
higher education budgets. And
they made up for it with higher
tuition.
And that's why at least at
public colleges and
universities, the costs have
gone up a
lot.
Now, here's what we've done. The
first thing I did when I came
into office was we reformed
the student loan program because
what was happening was on
federally subsidized student
loans, it was all run through
the banks. And the banks were
getting billions of dollars
of profits for managing these
loans to students, even though
the loans were guaranteed by the
federal government so they
weren't taking any risk.
And we said let's cut the
middleman out, let's loan
directly to students. So that
saved us
tends of billions of dollars.
That allowed us to expand the
Pell grant program and to
lower, or cap interest
on student loans.
But just because we did more
loans or more grants, that
doesn't always help with the
rising costs. And that's why
I've proposed this two-year free
college -- community college,
because what that does is that
allows a young person who's
strapped for cash and whose
parents,
you know, are doing everything
they can, but can only do so
much, to say I'll get my first
two years for free, I'll
transfer those credits to a four
year public college or
university
and I've now just potentially
cut the amount of loans that
I've got in half.
And for some people who decide
they don't need a four-year
college education, they want
to be a graphic designer, they
want to go into a trade, now
they can get the training
they need without
incurring any debt.
So, you know, these are all
proposals that are -- we know
work. There's some states and
cities that already are doing
this to -- free community
college proposal and it's
working
and it's really helping
to reduce costs.
And the last thing, we're also
trying to work with the
universities just to figure out
ways
that they can reduce costs,
using, for example, online
learning, you know, making,
putting
out reports so that parents and
students are better consumers,
so that they know well,
let me not sign up for that
four-year college where the
graduation rates are low and
it's
got great dorms and great gyms
and nice food, but I'm going to
be $50,000 worth of debt
and I may not get a job.
GWEN IFILL: Thank
you, Mr. President.
Sir, your name?
ARVIS DAWSON, Community
Leader: Arvis Dawson.
GWEN IFILL: And your question?
ARVIS DAWSON: First of all, I
want to thank you, President,
for your service to our country.
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: Thank you, sir.
ARVIS DAWSON: And, uh, despite
the polls, there's a lot of love
for you here in Elkhart.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
Oh, I appreciate that.
You know, I -- I actually...
(APPLAUSE)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: -- one
thing is after seven and a half
years, you don't worry about
the polls no more.
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
You really don't.
(CROSSTALK)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
So, it's alright.
ARVIS DAWSON: My question to
you, Mr. President, I am a
strong believer in equal rights
for
everyone...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Yes.
ARVIS DAWSON: A very strong
believer in that. I was
wondering, though, with all the
pressing
issues that you have
before you right now...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Right.
ARVIS DAWSON: -- why is the
issue of which bathroom a person
uses such an issue?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well, I
-- you know what, it's -- it's a
great question. Uh, somehow
people think I made it an issue.
I didn't make it an issue. There
-- there are a lot
of things that are more
pressing, you're absolutely
right.
What happened and what continues
to happen is you have
transgender kids in schools. And
they get bullied. And they get
ostracized. And it's tough for
them.
And, you know, we're of the
generation where that stuff was
all out of sight and out of
mind and so people -- people
suffered silently. But now
they're out in the open. And the
question
then is, schools are asking us,
the Department of Education, for
guidance, how should we
deal with this?
And my answer is that we should
deal with this issue the same
way we'd want it dealt
with if it was our child. And
that is to try to create an
environment of some dignity and
kindness for these kids.
And that's sort of the bottom
line. I have to just say what's
in my heart but I also
have to look at, you
know, what's the law?
And my best interpretation of
what our laws and our
obligations are is that we
should
try to accommodate these kids so
that they are not in a
vulnerable situation.
Now, I understand that people,
you know, for religious beliefs
or just general discomfort
might disagree. And I'm not the
one who's making a big issue of
it.
But if it -- if the school
districts around the country ask
me what do you think we should
do? Then what we're going to do
is tell them let's find a way to
accommodate them in a
way that makes sure that these
kids are not, you know, excluded
and ostracized.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask Mr.
Dawson whether he's satisfied
with the answer to that question
and what -- what is it about
this that bothers you?
ARVIS DAWSON: Mainly, it's my
religious belief. Yes, I'm
satisfied with the answer to the
question.
PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA: All right.
ARVIS DAWSON: -- coming from the
church background that I come
from, I believe in equal rights
for all.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: I know.
ARVIS DAWSON: But I think, too,
wherever you were going to the
bathroom before, continue
to go to the bathroom there. I
don't -- I don't have a problem
with that.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
but, right. And -- and the
problem is just for a lot of
these kids, they might not even
feel comfortable going to the
bathroom, which is a tough
situation
if you're a kid. And -- and
look, I -- I have profound
respect for everybody's
religious
beliefs on this. But if you're
at a public school, the question
is, how do we just make
sure that, uh, children are
treated with kindness. That's
all. And you know, my reading of
scripture
tells me that that golden rule
is pretty high up there in terms
of my Christian belief.
That doesn't mean somebody else
has to interpret it the same
way. It does mean as president
of the United States, those are
the values that I think are
important. Now, this is going
to be settled by the courts,
ultimately. There have been
lawsuits everywhere. I just
wanted
to emphasize to you, though,
this -- it's not like I woke up
one day and I said, man,
you know what we really need to
do is let's start working on
high school bathrooms.
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: You
know, that -- I was thinking
about ISIL. And I was...
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: --
thinking about, you know, the
economy and I'm thinking about
jobs. But one of the things
that, as president, you learn is
that you don't choose the issues
all the time. The issues come to
you. And then you have to make
your best judgment about
what you think is right. And...
GWEN IFILL: I...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: -- and
I've expressed what I think is
the best judgment that is
consistent with our
traditions and our laws.
GWEN IFILL: I have another issue
to come to you here, Mr.
President.
What's your name?
NANCI WIRT, Interior
Decorator: Nanci Wirt
GWEN IFILL: And what do you have
-- your question for the
president?
NANCI WIRT: Uh, Mr. President,
I, like many Americans,
politically, I'm in the center.
I'm not too right,
I'm not too left.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Right.
NANCI WIRT: So I spend a lot
of time watching the debates.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Right.
NANCI WIRT: Both parties, trying
to get a sense of who is my
candidate.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Right.
NANCI WIRT: So I watched a lot
this year. And what I came back
with at the end was I
found that there was a
lot of lack of civility.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Yes.
NANCI WIRT: That people were
speaking -- candidates were
speaking over one another,
shouting,
calling each other names. There
was a lot of inappropriate
comments. I was pretty saddened
by the whole situation.
I'm curious what your thoughts
are on the tone of the debates
overall.
GWEN IFILL: Were you watching
the debates, Mr. President?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: You
know, I confess, I didn't.
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Um, but
-- but I -- but I'm really glad
you did. I don't watch them
because I'm just steeped in this
stuff, so I could probably make
all the arguments for
all the candidates, including,
uh, the Republican side, just
because I've heard them a lot in
my day-to-day work.
But I think it's really
important that you took the time
to do what every citizen should
do, which is try
to get informed.
You know, this whole issue of
civility is -- you're right to
be distressed by it. Now,
I think it's important not to
romanticize what politics used
to be like. You know, if
you read accounts of what like
Tom Jefferson said about john
Adams or what folks said about
Lincoln, I mean they called them
monkeys, they said they were
illegitimate children,
they...
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: -- they
said, you know, I mean they're
-- there's some rough
stuff. It wasn't on TV, because
they didn't have TVs. But it was
rough.
But I do think what has happened
is that some of the boundaries
that used to be there for
how you debated ideas have
broken down. And no offense
against Gwen, because she works
for PBS, which is
all about civility.
GWEN IFILL: Absolutely.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: But...
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: -- but I
do think that the TV culture,
the reality culture contributes
to this, because what happens --
and talk radio culture. What
happens is that politicians
get the most attention the
more outrageous they sound.
And so if you're civil and quiet
and polite, nobody covers you.
But if you say something
crazy or rude, you're all over
the news. And that has fed, I
think, this kind of -- of
arms race of insult and
controversy that doesn't shine a
lot of light, even though it
generates
a lot of heat.
The other thing that contributes
to this is, and a lot of times
we blame politicians, but
part of it is what's happened in
terms of our voting patterns.
And there are a couple
of reasons for this. One is
political gerrymandering, which
is that the way district lines
are drawn
are -- now they use computers.
They're so precise that whoever
is in power, whether
it's Democrats in a state or
Republicans in a state, and both
parties do this.
They will draw these lines so
precisely that every district
they know this is going to
be a Republican district; this
is going to be a Democratic
district. And so out of the
435 seats in the House of
Representatives, maybe 10
percent of them are actually
competitive.
And the rest of them, no matter
what happens, are going to be
either Republican or Democrat.
Well, what happens when that
exists? It means you don't -- if
you're a Republican, you don't
have to worry about what the
Democrats are saying. You don't
have to go to the center.
You just have to make sure that
the tea party Republican to your
right doesn't say something
more outlandish than you do.
Same thing on the left. The
Democrat is only worried about
what the person on the
farthest left is going to say.
And that drives people into
opposite directions. So, the one
thing I would say is, first of
all, don't get discouraged. Get
out there and vote. But what I
would say is that every
voter here, Democrat or
Republican, if you want more
civility, then you vote for
folks
who are civil and who are making
arguments and using logic and
presenting evidence.
And not just somebody who's
popping off. And that's true
whether it's on the left or the
right. And if you are voting for
somebody who's just being
controversial for the sake
of it or helping you vent, then
you only have yourself to blame
if it turns out that the
political debate starts
getting more and more crass.
GWEN IFILL: Since we're talking
politics, Mr. President, I do
want to ask you this.
The primary season is almost
over. We've talked a lot about
what Republicans are and are not
doing in this campaign. I wonder
when we can expect you to get
involved with the Democratic
race? Are we going to see an
endorsement soon? Bernie
Sanders, perhaps?
(LAUGHTER)
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well, I
-- the -- I think that there's
been a healthy debate in
the Democratic Party. And it's
almost over. Yeah, we've got on
Tuesday you'll have some
big states -- California and New
Jersey, where the votes will
take place. What I've tried
to do is to make sure that
voters, rather than me,
big-footing the situation or
deciding
the outcome.
I think we'll probably have a
pretty good sense next week of
who the nominee will end
up being. I think both Bernie
Sanders and Hillary Clinton are
good people. I think that
they broadly share the goals
that I have. There are some
tactical differences within
the Democratic Party about
how do you get stuff done.
But there's going to be plenty
of time for me to step in and
campaign.
GWEN IFILL: I notice you don't
mind using their names.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well, as
I said, they're not as good at
marketing.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: We have another
question for you here.
DEAN RINK, Farmer: Mr. Obama, in
regards to Obamacare, I've been
receiving my health insurance
through the marketplace. And the
first year, the subsidy was very
high and my premium was
very low and I was very happy.
Now, beginning in January of
'16, the subsidy was lower and
my premium went up dramatically.
And my income was nearly the
same. In fact, for this year I'm
paying 22 percent of my
income for health care. So
that's my concern and my
complaint.
The second part of my question
is: What's going to happen to
Obamacare in 2017 and beyond?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Yeah.
Well, I don't know the
particular circumstance. Your
subsidy
should not have gone down if
your income is more or less the
same, unless there was some
significant difference in your
tax status. So I'll try to find
out about that.
What is true is that some of the
premiums went up because
essentially in the first year
of a startup program, a lot of
insurance companies didn't quite
know how to price things. And
so they priced substantially
lower than people expected.
And now things are kind of
evening out, which means that
some folks who overpriced,
they've
dropped their prices. Some have
gone up. But on average, what
we're seeing is that the
average increase is about four
bucks per month for somebody who
is signed up.
Some markets are different. One
of the big problems that we've
had is making sure that
there's enough competition,
enough insurers who are bidding
for your business in rural
communities, because some areas
just don't have as many
providers and as many insurance
companies. And so you only get
one or two, and they start
thinking, well, maybe we can
jack up prices a
little bit higher.
Now, technically, your state
insurance commissioner is able
to -- has to approve any hikes
and
those that are not justified
economically, those should be
stopped.
But what I would say generally
is that, and we're monitoring
this very carefully, I promise.
Obviously everybody's been
predicting disaster and
apocalypse on this thing for a
long time
-- is generally speaking
premiums have been lower than
people expected originally. In
some markets, they've gone up
faster; some markets slower.
They're still cheaper than you
would be able to get outside of
the marketplace. But there
are some things that we've got
to do to lower health care costs
generally, particularly
drug prices. And part of
Obamacare that's not talked
about a lot is us trying to
improve
the health care delivery system
so that there's not as much
waste.
So that you're not taking
multiple tests; so that you're
not readmitted into a hospital
because they didn't take care of
business the first time. And
that's part of the reason
why overall health care
inflation has actually gone done
-- has gone up at about half the
rate that it did
before the law passed.
For the average person here,
your premiums are about $2,600
lower than they would have
been if health care inflation
had kept on going up at the same
pace as it did before
Obamacare was passed. Now, the
fact that they're still going up
makes you feel bad. You'd feel
worse if they'd gone up faster.
So this is still an issue of
challenge to policymakers and to
families. I'm happy, after
-- after this town hall, to get
some details about your
situation because if you're
income
didn't go up much, at least the
subsidies should not change that
much.
GWEN IFILL: Another question for
you over here, Mr. President.
Your name?
GERALD SPARKS, Union Member: My
name is Gerald Sparks. I'm a
member of the Local Level 18
Painters and Allied Trade Union.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
Good to see you.
GERALD SPARKS: Two-part question
for you. First, with over 79,000
Syrian refugees already
coming into the states and tens
of thousands more coming in, how
can you guarantee that
there's none that have been
radicalized? And two, don't you
feel that that money would
be better spent taking care of
the tens of thousands of
homeless veterans we have
sleeping
on the streets every night, some
with children and the ones
committing suicide daily? Thank
you, Mr. President.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Well,
first, let me say, sir, that we
don't have tens of thousands
of Syrian refugees coming in.
We're trying to get -- trying to
admit several thousand.
So far, I think, we've been able
to admit about 2,500. In
contrast, Canada's taken in
25,000. We're a much bigger
country. Germany's taken in half
a million.
There's a tragedy going on
there. People are homeless and
dying and we're the biggest,
wealthiest country on Earth and
we have some obligation to help,
just like we'd expect
people to help if Americans
were in trouble.
And so I think it's really
important to understand we're
not spending a lot of money on
bringing
in and housing refugees, and
this is -- this is what I mean
about making sure when we're
deciding about elections and
voting that we look at the
facts. I'm trying to get more
refugees admitted. It's not
close to the kinds of numbers
you're talking about.
We just can't, and the reason is
because refugees are actually
admitted on a much stricter
standard
than the average tourist who's
coming in on a visa. They have
to go through a full background
check, FBI, our intelligence
agencies, check through every
single person who comes in.
It's like a month-long process.
But if you are somebody from
France, you don't even need
a visa, you just hop on a plane
and you're here in the United
States. And if you're a
member of ISIL that happens to
be a citizen of France or
Germany, you come on in.
Much more risk is involved in
terms of just ordinary tourists
or, for that matter, American
citizens who've gotten
brainwashed by ISIL on the
computer like they did in San
Bernardino,
and suddenly, they just go to
the local gun store where, by
the way, because the Republicans
have blocked it, we can't even
put them on a list to prevent
them from buying weapons.
That's a much bigger danger
than the Syrian refugees.
Now, the second point you made
about veterans homelessness, one
of the things that I did
when I came in office is I said
if somebody's put on a uniform
of this country and fought
for our freedom, they cannot be
homeless, and our goal should be
zero homelessness,
zero tolerance for homelessness.
And we have cut veterans
homelessness since I've been
in office by about a third. Tens
of thousands of veterans who
used to be homeless are now
housed.
But one is too many, so we've
got some cities where they've
set a goal of zero homeless
veterans and they've actually
achieved it. We're going to keep
on working as long as
we have to to get this done and
we have budgeted the dollars to
make sure that every veteran
is -- is put in place.
But I just want to say that the
reason that we've got veterans
homelessness is not
because of Syrian refugees, it's
not because of undeserved folks
on welfare, it's because
we've had a Congress that for
too long talks tough about
patriotism and looking out for
our troops and orders folks --
are fine with us sending 180,000
people into war, but then
when it came down to the actual
veterans budget, it wasn't
there.
And I increased the veterans
budget more -- the V.A. budget
more than any president
in history. I increased it 11
percent my first year. But we've
still got work to do on it.
GWEN IFILL: Mr. President, I'm
going to squeeze in another...
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: Thank
you for the question, though.
Are you a veteran yourself?
GERALD SPARKS: No, but
I support our troops.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: All
right. I appreciate you, sir.
GWEN IFILL: Yes. Hi.
What's your name?
MARIANNE NEUFELDT, Homemaker:
Hi. Marianne Neufeldt.
GWEN IFILL: OK. What's your
question for the president?
MARIANNE NEUFELDT: Mr.
President, what is the one thing
you would go back and change
during your presidency? And
how would you change it?
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA:
Other than dying my hair?
(LAUGHTER)
I have to tell you, every day,
you know, I make some mistake.
Fortunately, most of them
aren't that big. Sometimes, you
just make -- use your best
judgment because you're working
with probabilities. You don't
know the perfect answer. If
something's easy, it does not
reach
my desk. By definition, somebody
else has solved it. If
something's easy to solve, I
don't even see it. Somebody else
has solved it a long time ago.
So most of the time, I'm dealing
with probabilities. If I'm
making a decision about are we
going
to take a strike against bin
Laden, I don't even know if bin
Laden's there and I've got
young men and women -- young men
who are at risk when I send them
there. I'm operating
on probabilities.
When we decided to bail out the
auto industry -- you were
talking about polls earlier.
That
polled at about 10 percent even
in Michigan because people were,
you know, so mad about
the bank bailouts, they thought
no more bail outs. And we
weren't positive the thing was
going to work, but we knew that
if we didn't do it, you'd lose a
million jobs all across
the Midwest, including here in
Indiana. So we made that bet and
it worked.
If I were to talk about domestic
policy, I think the thing I
would've probably done
differently
is I would've tried to describe
earlier to the American people
how serious the recession
was going to be, which is --
which would've hopefully allowed
us to have an even bigger
response than we did.
Our -- the Recovery Act, our
response to the recession was
actually bigger than the New
Deal. We -- that's how a lot of
teachers kept their jobs, that's
how a lot of construction
workers stayed on the job and
projects kept on going. That's
how a lot of states met their
budget. That's why we didn't end
up having 30 percent
unemployment.
But in the balance of trying to
reassure people, I maybe didn't
indicate to them that look,
this is probably going to be a
two-, three-, four-year process
of us digging out of this
hole, so that we could have
staged some of that recovery
money over a longer period of
time and possibly
accelerated the recovery.
In terms of foreign policy, I've
said this before, we decided to
go in as part of a broader
coalition into Libya to make
sure that this guy Gadhafi, who
had been a state sponsor
of terrorism, didn't go in and
start slaughtering his own
people. We succeeded and
probably
saved tens of
thousands of lives.
But I was -- I did a little too
much of counting on other
countries to then stabilize and
help
support government formation.
And now it's kind of a mess. I
could give you a long list.
(LAUGHTER)
But I -- I tell you, I mean, the
one thing I can say is every day
when I wake up, I'm
focused on how can I make your
lives better; how can I protect
the American people; how
can I increase their prosperity.
At the end of the day, I can
always say honestly that
I did my best. And hopefully,
what I'm also usually trying to
do is to admit that if
something's
not working as well as it should
be, let's see if we can improve
it.
That's where we need, though, a
Congress that is not about
yelling and is more about
solving
problems.
GWEN IFILL: Mr. President, we
will prevail on you to come back
and give us the rest of
that list at another time.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA: OK.
GWEN IFILL: We're out
of time for now.
Thank you very much
for joining us.
Thank you very much, the good
people of Elkhart, Indiana, for
joining us. We really appreciate
it.
We hope you will keep tuning
into the PBS NewsHour and at our
website at PBS.org/newshour
for more on all of the issues
and more raised tonight.
From all of us here in the
Hoosier State today, thank you
to the president and to the
people
of Elkhart.
Good night.